# Lezione 3

* Ripetizione lezione 2
* Definizione di larghezza di banda (bandwidth): quanto un segnale
occupa lo spettro delle frequenze. È correlata con velocità, ma non sono la
stessa cosa.

## ISO/OSI stack (_de-jure_)

* It's a reference model that is not actually implemented
* It comprises 7 layers, from top to bottom
    * Transport: 
        * Data units: datagram or segment
        * Tackles quality of service problems of layer 3
        * Segmentation and reassembling of data
        * Application multiplexing and demultiplexing (e.g. classic TCP port)
        * Main functions (not ob):
            * Flow control (e.g. reduce datarate when the network is pretty
              busy)
            * Error control
            * Packet ordering: as a consequence of packet segmentation and
            potentially data loss
    * Network: 
        * Data unit: packet and datagram (for IP)
        * Responsible of delivering network-layer packets from one host to
          another
            * Connection-less: datagram network
                * Each packet routed independently (this is how Internet works)
            * Connection-oriented:
                * Route is estabilished once and used for all packets belonging to
                  a specific host to host communication (telephon networks)
        * Main functions:
            * Routing and forwarding
                * Routing: build the routing table with clever algorithms
                * Forwarding: read the routing table and effectly relay the
                  packets
            * Congestion control
    * Link:
        * Data unit: frame
        * Single hop communication: the communication is single hop.
        Otherwise we need the network layer to do its work.
        * Defines an addressing mechanism: to disambiguate signals of the
          physical layer, which are often send in broadcast (e.g. RF signal)
        * Mux and demux (LLC sublayer): multiple protocols of the upper layer
          might use the link layer.
        * Error discovery and recovery:
        * Mediuum access control (MAC sublayer): channel access rule
        (e.g. TDMA, FDMA, CSMA, etc.)
    * Physical: transforms the bits into a physical signal
        * Data unit: bits or symbols (multiple bits)
        * Defines how to establish, maintain and teardown a physical connection
        * Defines encoding, connectors, voltages, modulations, etc.
        * Takes care of trasmitting raw bits on the interface
            * Electrical
            * RF
            * Sound
            * Light:
                * Fiber: even when nothing is being transmitted, an continuous
                  sequence of 0 and 1 is perpertually transmitted in order to
                  synchronize the trasnmitter and the receiver.
* Not all devices need to have all the layers.
E.g. the AP (access point) doesn't need to have layers other than 
physical and data link.

## TCP/IP stack (_de-facto_)

* How do TCP/IP protocols map into the OSI model? There are different point of
  view
  * Professor: the TCP/IP actually defines only protocol down to the network
  layers. For the underneath layers, it defines only a "standard interface"
    
* Protocols in the TCP/IP reference model
